[Music]
you know we've managed to go hundreds of
thousands of miles into space but when
it comes to the earth we've barely
scratched the surface our planet's core
is a magnificent mystery filled with
secrets well it's time to figure them
out the Earth's inner core is an
extra-hot solid ball with an approximate
radius of 760 miles to put that into
perspective
it's just 30% smaller than the moon but
if we've never been there how did we
find this out well we've learned about
the core by observing the effects of
gravity on objects on the surface of our
planet from there it's estimated that
the Earth's mass is 5.6 sextillion tons
get at your bathroom scale
now don't the density of everything that
lies on the surface is much lower than
the cores average density scientists
figured out that most of the Earth's
mass is located towards the center of
our planet it's estimated that more than
80% of the core consists of one of the
ten most common elements in our galaxy
fire but the iron on the Earth's surface
is kind of limited I know what you're
wondering how did the iron make it all
the way down to the core well there is a
simple explanation the heavy elements
somehow pushed itself literally towards
the center of the earth and at I'm
pardon the pun of research was done to
figure out how most of the earth's
surface is made of rocks called
silicates and the molten iron had some
difficulty passing through them to help
you understand think of how water
struggles to get through a greasy
surface but in 2013
Wendy Mao and her team from Stanford
discovered a possible solution for how
this happened they began an experiment
to see how iron and silicate react when
they're exposed to extreme pressure like
that in the core they used a diamond
anvil cell to pinch the two substances
under those conditions and they achieved
it the pressure was 330 Giga Pascal's
which is around 3.3 million times the
atmospheric pressure
our planet the molten iron slowly
squeeze through the silicate rocks and
they had their answer it took millions
of years for the iron to reach the
center so it happened at a snail's pace
since snails weren't around back then
the iron had to guess how fast to go
well now that we have that figured out
how do we know what size the core is
that's when seismology comes into play
during an earthquake
shockwaves are spread through the planet
seismologists studied these vibrations
and tried to read the reflections on the
other side
it's like Thor is hitting one side of
the planet with his hammer and the
seismologists are listening from the
opposite end but these vibrations also
take different routes they go through
various parts of the planet and that
affects the sound they make at the end
let's take a small detour for a minute
seismology is quite an old scientific
field in the old days when vibrations
occurred scientists noticed that
something was wrong with them these
vibrations were s waves and when they
were supposed to show up on the other
side they just vanished at first they
thought that something was wrong with
her equipment and it just wasn't picking
up the vibrations but as science
progressed it turned out that these
picky s waves could only go through
solid material and not liquid so
something molten was present in the
center of the earth
that was preventing the vibrations from
going through so they started digging
into their data they mapped out the
paths of the seismic waves and found
that around 1800 60 miles from the
Earth's surface the rocks transformed
into a liquid but there's also an
interesting fact in the game angle Amon
was a Danish seismologist and in the
1930s she discovered a new wave pattern
first we had the S waves that didn't
pass through a liquid but then there
were also P waves that could travel
through the core and appear on the
opposite side of the planet
that was when Inga came up with a theory
that the core has two layers the solid
inner core which is around 3,700 miles
below the surface and the molten outer
core
which is around 1860 miles below our
feet when advanced seismographs were
invented her theory was confirmed but
that took 40 years so now that we have
the structure figured out let's talk
about how hot the core is and why we've
already established that we can't put a
thermometer down there to study the
temperatures so scientists tried to
figure that out by creating the same
crushing pressures in their labs again
in 2013 a team of French researchers
came up with the most accurate number
that we've had in years
they put pure iron through high pressure
almost higher than that of the core to
come up with their findings the
temperature of the inner core is about
nine thousand eight hundred degrees
while the melting point of pure iron is
about twenty-eight hundred degrees at
the core its melting point is around
eleven thousand degrees the fluctuation
in those temperatures comes from
factoring in the extreme pressure the
iron is exposed to at the core also
other elements inside the core could be
bringing the temperature down by
approximately 400 degrees but the reason
it remains solid is because of the slow
cooling of the outer core and it's
compression the inner core spins faster
than the earth that's caused by the
thermal activity inside our planet which
creates the magnetosphere oddly it takes
a ton of time pardon the pun for heat to
leave the earth but I'll get to that in
a bit
there are three main reasons why the
earth is still boiling the first one is
that the core has remained hot from the
time our planet was formed roughly
four-and-a-half billion years ago
remember that number because towards the
end I'll explain how that happened
that heat hasn't been lost yet in fact
the earth is only cooling down around
200 degrees every billion years secondly
it generates heat from the friction of
the dense materials as they move and the
last reason it's so high is from the
decay of radioactive elements so why is
this important it makes it easy for
scientists to understand how it affects
the speed of vibrations that go through
the core
remember the p-waves I told you about
earlier well these guys travel slower
than they should while passing through
the core this shows that there must be
some other element in there that we
haven't figured out yet nickel is one of
them but when scientists ran some tests
with nickel the p-waves didn't slow down
enough so they started digging
metaphorically in 2015 a new study from
Durham University came out it claimed
that 90% of the Earth's sulfur is in the
core so maybe that could be the missing
element around four-and-a-half billion
years ago the earth collided with a
large planetary body that eventually
tore apart our planet and formed the
moon that incident left traces behind
that led the studies in a new direction
when the impact happened the Earth's
mantle melted and some sulfur rich
liquids squeezed through the ruins and
reformed it some of it was probably lost
in space but the rest sunk to the core
scientists from Durham University
confirmed that theory by measuring the
isotope ratios of elements in the mantle
they compared them to meteorites which
were possibly part of the Earth's
original form the problem was that there
were so many different elements in the
mantle it's quite difficult to draw firm
conclusions so they came up with another
idea
copper is usually bound to sulfur so
they analyzed the copper from the
Earth's mantle and crust now this was a
three-stage study done in different labs
using state-of-the-art mass
spectroscopes
yes still with me here good for you they
found that there was a teeny tiny
difference in the copper ratios between
the Earth's mantle samples and the
meteorite samples that confirmed the
theory that the earth originally
collided with another body
and most of its mantle just splattered
around space we also know that the core
consists of some sulfur hopefully soon
we'll be able to find out what the other
trace elements are so to answer your
final question yes the center of the
earth is hard core yes you were waiting
for that one weren't you hey if you
learn something new today then give the
video a like and share it with a friend
and here are some other cool videos I
think you'll enjoy just click to the
left or right and remember stay on the
bright side of life